Hey everyone, I'm Chris Crow, campus pastor for Crossway Christian Church's Millford campus here in Southern New Hampshire, where our mission is all about practicing the way of Jesus together as we pursue God, build community, and unleash compassion.
I pray that what you hear today will help you experience God more deeply and live more and more like Jesus.
Let's take our Bibles this morning.
We're gonna go to Psalms 23.
It's so good to see so many in the house of the Lord.
And so we have some from the pond as Neil was mentioning.
If you're from the pond, would you raise your hand?
Just hear from the pond.
Thank you for coming.
Thank you.
Yeah.
Thank you for joining us.
And downtown Matt is preaching the word of the Lord.
And then they have three services downtown this morning.
And so I told Matt I said, Matt, we'll be praying for you, man.
So he's like, yeah, hallelujah.
Thank the Lord.
But we're going to get into God's word.
We do this every single Lord's day.
And we just love the Bible, don't we?
We love the Bible.
And we love getting into the Bible.
And so I'm going to continue the series experiencing Psalm 23 together.
And incidentally, I just sense of the Holy Spirit before I got up here that we should probably pray for the person in front of you.
You're saying, I don't know the person in front of me.
Can we do that?
You can just do that right now as your eyes are open.
Just say, whoever this person is, Lord, we just lift them up.
I pray for them.
I pray that you would meet their needs.
Whatever it is, the Holy Spirit's giving you to pray for that person in front of you.
If you're in the front row, then you can pray for, I guess you could pray for me, right?
That would be great.
You could pray for the worship team that was up here.
But let's do that.
Just take a moment and just pray for that person in front of you.
That's the Holy Spirit to give you something for them.
Maybe it was a word of encouragement.
that you'll speak into their life after service or maybe during service.
Yeah, what is it?
The Holy Spirit's praying for that person.
Thank you, Lord, we receive all of this.
We trust you're doing your works, good works, always good works in our lives.
And we thank you, Holy Spirit, that you wrote the Word of God.
And you used David in Psalm 23, and now we're going to look at it, verse four.
And we pray that you would just bring application to our lives.
Helps to realize that this just can't go in our brain.
It has to really go into our soul.
It has to go into every part of who we are.
So that we're different people.
Yeah, we just don't want to win at Bible trivia because we have a piece of knowledge in our brain.
We want it to be life transformational.
So make it application.
We pray Holy Spirit.
As we look at verse four, Psalm 23 in Jesus' name.
Amen?
Amen.
Here's the verse that we're looking at.
And if you could say it out loud with me, it's verse four Psalm 23.
Ready, begin.
I've titled this,
fifth message in the series, how to have vision in your valley.
How to have vision in your valley.
Now, we're going to do a little bit of a test.
It's an eye test.
You ever had those before?
Oh, you wait until you get as old as I do.
Some of you don't have glasses, but you're going to have to get glasses someday or contact lenses.
So there's going to be an eye chart on the screen.
And I want you to read as much as you can.
How about the top line?
Can anybody read the top line?
Can we do that?
Okay, you're doing well.
Now this is a spiritual eye test, by the way.
Didn't mention that.
Okay, so you're gonna go to the next line.
Try to read that nice and loud.
Can you say it out loud?
What is it?
H and N. Okay, third line down.
You are so spiritual.
You have good vision.
Incredible spiritual vision.
Okay, now cover one of your eyes.
Okay, cover the other one too and read the bottom line.
What's so funny?
If you're really spiritual, you could do that.
Spiritual vision.
You'll see a couple of images here.
One is taken from the top of Mount Washington.
What a view, huh?
That's a great view.
Been on top before.
I'm sure many of you have if you've been in New England a certain amount of years.
And so here's another view.
It's from the bottom of the Grand Canyon.
So you have two different perspectives.
You have two different views here, right?
One view is very expansive.
I mean, it's panoramic.
It's large.
You can see a long way.
And then the other view is not so much.
Which of those images can you see clearer is your vision better?
What do you think?
Mountain view?
Are you sure you have mountain view?
Yeah?
People are looking around like, oh, yeah, yeah.
Don't worry.
Just raise it up confidently.
The valley, view in the valley.
What we're gonna see that David actually found that in the valleys of life, our vision spiritually is actually better.
But we don't embrace valleys too often.
Take me to the top of the mountain, and I wanna be on top of the mountain, right?
But don't put me in the valley of the shadow of what?
Of death.
But actually your vision is gonna get better in the valley.
I wanna look at this.
with you.
But before I get into the text with you and pull out four applications of truth, I just want to highlight something I think is significant.
Isaiah chapter 22 verse one, it'll be on the screen.
Would you bring that up please?
Thank you.
The oracle concerning the valley of vision.
Does anybody know the reference valley of vision?
What it refers to?
It's Jerusalem.
who eventually became king of Israel, who eventually conquered and then made Jerusalem the capital.
It was David, right?
Here's another verse here if you could bring that out too.
I'm losing my voice already.
And in the house of the king of Judah, say, hear the word of the Lord, house of David, thus says the Lord, execute justice in the morning and deliver from the hand of the oppressor him who has been robbed.
lest my wrath go forth like fire and burn with none to quench it because of your evil deeds."
Keep going if you could.
One more.
Behold, I am against you, O inhabitant of Jerusalem.
O rock of the plain declares the Lord.
You who say, who shall come down against us and who shall enter our habitations.
What was happening is that they were going sideways spiritually.
Judgment would come.
You see Jerusalem is up.
And so a lot of scriptures will talk about going up to Jerusalem.
But when you look at the broader topography of all of the land, they're actually in a valley because some of the mountain ranges around them is actually higher than Jerusalem.
Oh, thanks brother.
Appreciate it.
So he's talking about the valley of vision.
Where do you think David got this metaphor for the valley of the shadow of death?
Well, we're going to find out this morning.
Are you ready?
It's important to look at that.
The city of Jerusalem became the city of what?
David became the city of David.
The valley of vision, his understanding of this went beyond the terrain that he traversed as he was on the run from King Saul for 20 years.
I want you to see this in your own life, because you're going to look at things, and you're going to think the thing in front of you is it, because it's going to be so difficult.
It's not it.
You're going to get vision to see beyond that.
But it's not going to come easy.
David, it didn't come easy for David to have vision in the valley.
Many years ago, there's a book written called The Valley of Vision.
I think I have a cop there.
It is, thank you.
The Valley of Vision.
Really a compilation of many of the Puritans' prayers.
Are you familiar with the Puritans?
Some of you might be familiar with the Puritans.
They came out of what is known as a post-reformation period of church history.
So you had the reformers, and the reformers went through a whole lot.
They weren't trying to obliterate the Catholic Church.
They were trying to reform it.
And they were reforming certain aspects of it.
Doctoral points, really.
The gospel is number one.
justification by faith alone in Christ alone.
Reformers, well, they went through valleys, deep valleys, many of them being put to death because of their reforms.
Well, the Puritans followed that.
And the Puritans themselves were going through very, very difficult valleys.
So they compiled, all of this is in a book called The Valley of the Vision.
It's a wonderful, wonderful read.
The ladies just started a book study by Nancy Lita Moss.
I have a copy of it up here.
And there's a poem that is in the front of this book.
And so I want you to listen to this as this is read to you concerning the valley of vision.
Let me learn by paradox that the way down is the way up.
That to be low is to be high.
That to be broken, that the broken heart is the healed heart.
That the contrite spirit
is the rejoicing spirit, that the repenting soul is the victorious soul, that to have nothing is to possess all, that to bear the cross is to wear the crown, that to give is to receive, that the valley is the place of vision.
How is your vision in the valley?
Do you understand what a valley is?
I want you to look at an image on the screen.
It's the picture of a beautiful valley.
Isn't that gorgeous?
Wouldn't that be wonderful to have a little bit of a hike through that valley?
That's not David's image.
That's not what David is thinking as he's writing Psalm 23, 4.
Off of the coast of the Philippines, off of the coast of Japan,
There's a trench, it's called the Mariana Trench.
It's 36,000 feet deep.
It's known as the darkest place on earth.
Mount Everest is high.
Does anybody know?
It's about 29 plus thousand.
About 5,000 more feet than Mount Everest is the Mariana Trench, the darkest place on earth.
So when David's talking about a valley here, he's talking about something much more beyond that image I just showed you.
This is darkness.
In fact, the word means deep darkness.
This is where you and I can go in our life.
We can find ourselves in the valley of the shadow of death in deep darkness.
That means the thoughts in your head are going to be so dark, it's going to terrify you.
That means the things that are going to come out of your heart and the challenges that you're going to face inside of your soul.
are going to be so dark and difficult.
You're not going to know what to do with yourself.
How can you have vision in that valley?
That's the question.
Well, David found it.
I'm going to show you how.
This is how we apply the Word of God.
You ready?
Here's number one.
You'll see it on the screen.
This is how you have vision in the valley, except the path of pain.
Number one.
except the path of pain.
David said, even though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, it's important that David has this understanding, this conception, this belief, this acceptance of the path that he's on, which is very painful.
He would be on the run from King Saul.
He would be enemy number one in King Saul's mind for 20 years.
Many of the Psalms were written during that period of time.
But Psalm 23 is unique in this sense.
David is drawing, yes, on his experiences on the run from King Saul.
But there was something so dark and so difficult that David went through, so painful that he refers to it as the valley of the shadow of death.
Do you know what that was?
That was when Absalom betrayed him.
And Absalom eventually was killed.
And it's so devastated, David.
Have you ever had somebody betray you?
Have you ever had your son or daughter betray you?
Don't raise your hand.
I don't mean to be that personal, but just to emphasize, this is a painful moment.
This is deep darkness for David.
And so he's trying to understand it.
Yes, he's trying to go through it.
He's trying to have this understanding, this comprehension, this vision in the middle of this valley.
Now I'm going to go to the text and I want you to follow along because I need you to take your Bibles and kind of go with me on this, all right?
We're going to go to the book of Joshua, Joshua chapter three, because David opens up verse four with even though.
Notice that even though.
It's an interesting start to this scripture.
And I think it'll be important for us to gain this first point.
on accepting the path of pain.
So take your Bibles and go to Joshua.
That's in your New Testament.
Go to your New Testament, right?
What's the matter?
Joshua, you're like he doesn't know his Bible very well.
It's important to bring your Bible to church.
This is a Bible.
This is a hard copy Bible.
If you have one on your phone, that's fine.
But please don't go to church without your Bible.
Don't rely on the preacher who has them on the screen all the time.
It's not good for us.
I'm okay with it having here and there.
So if you have a Bible, raise it up.
If you have a Bible like this one, raise it up.
Let's make everybody else feel real guilty that doesn't.
I say that in love, I truly do.
Truly do.
So verse one, then Josh was three.
One, then Joshua rose early in the morning and they set out from Shittim and they came to the Jordan River.
And he and all the people of Israel enlarged there before they passed over.
You might remember this event.
In the end of three days, the officers went through the camp and commanded the people.
As soon as you see the ark of the covenant of the Lord, your God being carried by the Levitical priest, then you shall set out from your place and follow it.
Yet there shall be a distance between you and it.
about 2,000 qubits in length, do not come near it in order that you may know that the way you shall go for you have not passed this way before uncertainty.
Now remember this, we're thinking valley.
We're not thinking mountain view.
When you're in the valley, you're limited.
So God's going to limit you from really seeing this panoramic view of what's going on.
You're going to want to see everything.
all at the same time.
That's who we are, human nature.
But God's not gonna allow that to happen.
This is why he sends us into the valleys.
This is why he allows us to go through the valley of the shadow of death.
I'm gonna show you what this is talking about how it connects to Psalm 23 in a moment.
Verse five, Joshua said to the people, consecrate yourselves for tomorrow, the Lord will do wonders among you.
He wants to do a wonder among you, whatever value you're going through.
So what he wants to do?
Joshua said to the priest, take up the Ark of the Covenant and pass on before the people.
So they took up the Ark of the Covenant and went before the people.
The Lord said to Joshua, today I will begin to exalt you in the sight of all Israel, that they may know that I, as I was with Moses, God's presence, right?
So I will be with you.
And as for you command the priest to bear the Ark of the Covenant, when you come to the brink of the waters of the Jordan, you shall stand in the Jordan.
And Joshua said to the people of Israel, come here and listen to the words of the Lord your God.
And Joshua said here is how you shall know that the living God is among you.
Even though, remember verse four, even though I'm tying this in, follow me on this.
Even though, here's how you shall know that the living God is among you and that he will without fail drive out from before you
The Canaanites, the Hittites, the Hevites, and the parasites, and the Gergeschites, and the Amorites, and the Jebusites.
That's a lot of enemies.
Those are not your enemies.
Those are representative of the demonic realm, though.
And those are against us.
And so God's going to do this for us.
Behold, the Ark of the Covenant, verse 11 of the Lord of all the earth is passing over before you into the Jordan.
Stop there.
Now we're back in Psalm 23, verse four, even though, even though.
What is happening here?
Why do I emphasize this?
Because God is over, listen, He is over and authoritative over the valley.
In other words, your affliction in the valley, God is authoritative over.
So when David says, even though,
He's saying the same thing.
The Lord's presence is passing in and through over and around my uncertainty in the middle of the valley because this is exactly where you're going to be.
You're going to be uncertain because you're not going to be able to see much.
And so as David's going through the valleys, the cracks and the crevices and all the things, he had criminals, yes, up there.
He had uncertain.
He couldn't see around the corner.
He didn't know ultimately where he's going to end up.
But he knew that the Lord's presence as he was with them, as they crossed over the Jordan that David would know that God is with them.
Even hold that in your mind.
Hold that in your mind.
Even though I walked through the valley, he says, I walked through it.
Doesn't say he's going to stay in it.
Some of you are thinking my valley experience is going to be for the rest of my life.
Have you ever thought that?
Just a few of us.
I'm only seeing a little head nod.
That's a horrible place to be.
It was horrible.
I'm just being honest with you.
I was like, am I going to be in this valley for the rest of my life?
In fact, Lord, am I going to end up in an institution?
Am I going to lose my mind?
It was a real thought.
I told you dark thoughts, right?
Do you know what was happening in the middle of that valley of the shadow of death?
Even though I was able to get to the place of saying, even though, because I started to realize that even though I couldn't see with a panoramic view, I didn't know all of what God was doing.
I could trust that His presence was going with me through that.
But here's the thing.
I had to accept the path of pain.
Some of you are not accepting it.
You're chafing against it.
You're resisting.
You're running.
You're wandering.
You're compromising.
Can't do any of that.
Here's what I'm going to encourage you to do.
Just say, God, I accept it.
This valley, I accept it.
Would you try that right now?
I accept it, Lord.
What's going to happen to your vision?
Oh, it's going to get better.
It's going to get better.
When he mentions here the valley of the shadow of death, again, he's not picturing a beautiful valley with flowers and streams and all of those things.
He's literally meaning a gorge.
I've never been to the flume gorge.
Oh, you got to go for that hike.
It's incredible.
Up in Franconia Notch.
I have a picture of it there.
This is a tourist attraction, right?
You pay money.
I think you pay money.
I can't remember.
And you hike through there.
And when you're hiking through this gorge, are you enjoying yourself or is it really a horrible experience?
Now you're saying it depends how it kind of shaped my mind, right?
I guess that would be true.
But typically if you're going through the flume gorge, you're thinking this is enjoyable.
This is wonderful.
It's beautiful.
Here's what's gonna happen to you.
It's not gonna be a tourist walk through the valley or the gorge, but you're gonna be going through there going like this.
Wow, this is incredible.
As hard as this is, Lord, I see you here.
I see your beauty over there.
This is what happens when you accept the path of pain.
When you're going through the gorge, you're gonna get glimpses.
Just like you would if you were traveling here.
I did this and we're going through there and we're like, wow, this is spectacular.
There's no way you can say that your valley of the shadow of death is spectacular unless you accept the path of pain.
And then when you do like David did, then you start to see something different.
See, some of you, your pain is so big that the person of God is so small.
You didn't like that one, did you?
It's true.
Here's what you do.
Elevate God.
Elevate Him.
He is big.
He's wonderful.
He's glorious.
He's beautiful.
He is God.
You do that in your valley of the shadow of death.
Don't make your pain the thing.
It'll feel like the thing, right?
It's not.
Number two, aggressively put fear in its place.
David says this, I will fear.
no evil, aggressively put fear in its place.
Now the word aggression, let me define that.
You're familiar with it.
I'm sure.
So I don't mean to imply that you're not just for those who might be like, okay, give me a little more clarity on the word aggression or aggressive.
I think it's appropriate at times to be aggressive or to have aggression.
It means hostile or violent behavior, a readiness to attack or confront.
And what I'm saying here in the context of what David is saying, he makes a choice.
I will fear no evil.
He's a very aggressive man when it comes to these things in his life.
He has to get to the place of intentionality.
He has to make a choice that the fear that the enemy is trying to bring against him will not overwhelm him or overcome him.
We have to make those same choices.
Because the enemy will come against you like a flood.
You think that the devil's not aggressive towards you?
Can I just remind you that he's a thief and he's a liar and he's a murderer from the beginning?
Do I need to remind anybody here and watching that the devil wants to destroy you?
Are you with me on that?
You're just looking at me like I lost my marbles.
He's going after you and he's going after your kids.
This is what he does.
And he's going to use fear.
Now, I understand fear.
I've battled with fear all of my life, anxiety.
Anybody struggle with anxiety here?
Don't leave me by myself.
Thank you, sir.
Appreciate that.
Stay some men.
We'd struggle with things.
So we do.
I'm familiar with it, but you got to be aggressive.
We got to be like David here.
He says, I will.
I will.
I will let fear.
No longer paralyzed me.
This is what you say.
Church before here, wonderful lady, Jodie Daniels.
I love Jodie so much.
She was battling with cancer.
I think three years, right?
And so we would visit her and I'd sit with her at her bedside and she'd be talking about fear, gripping her all the time.
I said, Jodi, I understand fear.
I don't understand in the context of the way you have because you have cancer and I've never had it.
I had a heart attack, you know, almost died that way.
So I get fear and anxiety when it comes to physical affliction.
So we're having a moment there, every time we see each other.
And I was like, you know, the Bible says over 200 times, I think you've been over 300 times, do not fear, do not fear, do not fear.
And she goes, I know, Pastor Chris, but it's so difficult.
I know it's difficult, Jodi.
I know it's difficult, be aggressive.
This is where we got it.
We have to declare that fear's not gonna paralyze us anymore.
And she would listen to me and we'd have prayer together and then I would leave.
She would come to church once in a while and she'd have her mask and she has to make sure her immune system is strong and she's sitting in the pew.
Somebody had bought her a sign, a wood sign that has an inscription that says, do not fear.
So I go to visit her one day and she goes, Pastor Chris, look what I have somebody bought for me.
do not fear, and I look at it every single day.
That's being aggressive.
Jody went to heaven.
Right up to the end, to her last breath, we were there.
And I saw a woman who was intentional.
What happened to her vision as she was aggressively putting fear in its place?
Her vision became clear of who God is, the goodness of God, the love of God, all of it.
Miss Jody, can I take you to Psalm three?
Go back to Psalm three.
We'll do this quickly.
Go back to chapter three.
Notice verse one, the psalmist says, oh Lord, how many are my foes?
Many are rising against me.
Many are saying of my soul, there is no salvation for him and God.
But you, O Lord, are a shield about me.
My glory and the lifter of my head.
Isn't that a beautiful word right there?
The lifter of my head.
I want you to say that.
Say it to yourself out loud.
The lifter of my head.
God, you're the lifter of my head.
Do you know how many times I've said that through the years?
in the midst of the deep darkness and the valley.
You're the lifter of my head, Lord.
I don't have to look down in fear.
I can look up in faith.
Can we do that one more time?
You're the lifter of my head is who you are, God.
I cried to the Lord, verse four, and he answered me from his holy hill.
I laid down and slept.
I woke again for the Lord sustained me.
I will not be afraid of many thousands of people who have set themselves against me all around.
Beautiful, beautiful.
Good to chapter 27, Psalm 27.
Look at verse one.
The Lord is my light and my salvation.
Whom shall I what?
Fear.
What's the answer?
No one, right?
Nothing, no one.
The Lord is the stronghold of my life.
of whom shall I be afraid?
When evil doers sail me to eat up my flesh, my adversaries and foes, it is they who stumble and fall.
Though an army in camp against me, my heart shall not fear.
The war rise against me, yet I will be confident.
One thing I have asked of the Lord that I will seek after, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life and to gaze upon the beauty of the Lord and to inquire in his temple.
Love it.
He will hide me in the shelter, his shelter, in the day of trouble.
He will conceal me under the cover of his tent, and he will lift me high upon a rock.
34-4.
Check this out.
I sought the Lord, and He answered me, and He delivered me from some of my fears.
Did I get that right?
Just checking, chapter 46, excuse me, one to three.
God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble.
Therefore, we will not, what?
Fear, though the earth gives way, though the mountains be moved into the heart of the sea, though its waters roar and foam, though the mountains tremble,
at its swelling.
Isn't that unbelievable?
He's using all of these images.
Can I have some images here?
Just bring those up really briefly.
I mean, it's a volcano.
Mountains be removed.
Mountains explode.
Volcanoes erupt.
I mean, this imagery that the writer is talking about here is incredible.
Of course, the oceans and how the oceans can roar.
All of those things are terrifying.
But even all of those things, David, and the writer of Psalm says, I will.
Not fear.
I will.
Make a declaration.
I will not fear.
Would you promise to do that?
Okay, watch what happens this week.
You're going to email me and you'll be like, you know, I never believe what happened.
My life just got harder.
That's what happens.
Devil's trying to come against you.
We got to be aggressive.
Here's what you do.
Declare it.
Claim it.
Don't worry, I'm not a prosperity preacher using that word.
But there is truth in that, renounce it.
The fear renounce it.
Resist it, choose.
Here's a verse, God hasn't given us the spirit of fear, but of power, love in a sound mind.
Do you know where that is?
That's in Timothy, the Apostle Paul said that.
It's a great verse.
So some of you think you're going nuts.
You're losing.
You're losing your mind.
Sound mine.
That's what the word of God says.
You have a sound mind.
Don't fall for the enemy with fear.
You're not going to lose it.
He keeps you together.
This is what he does.
Number three, acknowledge the presence of God.
Number three, how to have vision in your valley.
For you are with me, David said.
For you are with me, acknowledge the presence of God.
This is how your vision gets better.
He uses the word here, Jehovah's Shema.
It means the Lord is there.
It's a beautiful description of the Lord using his name, Jehovah's Shema.
Chapter 16, verse 8 of Psalms, it says, I have set the Lord always before me.
In other words, God's not over here.
And he says, I'm putting the Lord here.
I can take God and put him here.
That's not meaning that.
What he's saying is that I'm acknowledging the presence of God.
I have set God before me.
I acknowledge that He is there.
I acknowledge that I see Him.
I acknowledge that I feel Him, that I experience Him.
This acknowledgement is important for our vision to get better and stronger.
Revelation is 21-3, I believe I have it there.
There it is, thank you.
And I heard a loud voice from the throne saying, Behold, the dwelling place of God is with men.
He will dwell with them, and they will be as people.
And God Himself will be there with them as their God.
Beautiful.
That's talking about future, a lot of it.
Also present reality.
God with us.
When we first start out in the Lord or being converted or born again, we are just completely fired up about Him, aren't we?
Do you remember that day when you first believed and you're all excited?
And you just can't wait.
I mean, it's all brand new.
It's all exciting, kind of like the love boat.
Remember the love boat?
Confession time, crush on her.
Confession time.
Love exciting and new.
Come aboard.
We're expecting you.
Love, life's sweetest reward.
Let it flow.
Floats back to you.
It's love.
And then it gets back to port, right?
Then you get an argument with your spouse.
The kids go wacky on you.
The love seems to be gone.
It happens like that in our Christian life.
We can think that God disappeared.
Where's the love in our relationship?
Husbands and wives will talk about that, especially as they go through midlife.
They'll have those kinds of conversations.
It's not the same.
Here's what we can do in marriages.
Acknowledge the presence of your spouse.
It's kind of the same thing.
That love relationship that you had with the Lord at the beginning was so powerful and so strong, but it can seem like in the valley that God has says, you're on your own on this one.
He's not like that.
He just wants you to acknowledge that he's there.
You're saying, but I don't see him.
I don't feel him.
I don't hear him.
What do I do?
What am I asking you to do?
Just acknowledge Him still.
Still acknowledge Him.
And He will manifest.
He will show.
He'll speak to you.
He'll reveal to you.
Listen to this in Psalm 46.
I want to look at just verse 1 to 11.
You don't have to turn there.
God is our refuge and strength.
They're very present, help and trouble.
Therefore, we will not fear through the earth gives way.
The mountains be moved into the heart of the sea.
Its waters roar and foam through the mountains tremble at its swelling.
There is a river whose stream makes glad the city of God the holy habitation of the Most High.
God is in the midst of her.
She shall not be moved.
God will help her when mourning dawns.
The nation is raged.
The kingdom's totter.
He utters his voice.
The earth melts.
The Lord of hosts is with us.
The God of Jacob is our fortress.
Come behold, the works of the Lord, how he has brought desolations on the earth.
Oh, the Lord is with us here right now.
He's with us.
Acknowledge it.
Number four, finally, allow God's purposes to be fulfilled, your rod,
and your staff, they comfort me.
The rod was for correction.
The staff is for protection.
Both are descriptive of God's purposes in our lives.
Comfort and correction.
This is something that we need to allow.
Allow God to do this.
Allow God to correct you.
Does anybody need correction this morning?
Seriously.
It's like we all get there.
Does anybody need comfort?
You're saying, yeah, I need lots of comfort, but not so much the correction piece.
How about you take both of them?
This is how allowing God's purposes in our life.
David knew that.
Your rod and your staff, they comfort me.
Let me close.
I gotta have you turn to Luke chapter three, and this will be it.
Luke chapter three in our New Testament.
I won't kid around with you.
It's definitely in the New Testament.
So go to Luke three.
There's a TV show that Lisa and I have watched for years.
It's called 2020.
You might be familiar with that.
It's that show they solve mysteries and all that kind of thing.
And so you watch that and it's interesting to go through the episode of 2020 and you get to the end and you're like, oh, now I see.
Now I understand who the person was.
I did that to the other.
But God is doing that in all of our lives spiritually.
He's bringing us to 2020 vision in the middle of the valleys of life.
But I want to bring some encouragement as I close Luke chapter three verse four.
Amazing.
As it is written, book the words of Isaiah the prophet, the voice of one crying in the wilderness prepared the way of the Lord.
Who's that referring to?
Anybody know?
John the Baptist, yeah.
and make His past straight, every valley shall be filled.
Interesting.
Every valley shall be filled, and every mountain and hill shall be made low.
And the crooked shall become straight, and the rough places shall become level ways, and all flesh shall see the salvation of God.
Some of you need to see the salvation of God.
The valleys are going to be filled.
How do the valleys get filled in the Messiah, in Yeshua, in Jesus Christ, in the gospel?
So you're in a valley, whether you're a Christian or a non-Christian.
Can I talk to the non-Christian really quick?
You're not a believer yet.
You haven't repented of your sins and put your full faith in Jesus Christ, dying on a cross for you.
You haven't asked them into your life and say, would you forgive me?
I just want to follow you the rest of my days.
You haven't done that.
Then your valley will not be filled.
This deep darkness will only get darker for you.
Total and complete separation from a holy God for all eternity.
That'll be you.
It doesn't have to be.
John the Baptist came as a forerunner to Christ the Messiah, pointing people to Jesus.
Any pastor or preacher now points people to Jesus.
I'm pointing you to Jesus and the gospel.
Will you be born again?
Will you accept Him today?
You're saying, I've been running for far too long.
Well, stop running.
Today's the day of your salvation.
Jesus is the one that fills the valley.
He's there for you Christians that are going through some stuff.
I totally understand.
And you're going to be uncertain about the next turn.
You're going to be uncertain about where this is leading.
That's all okay.
It's going to take some time.
I want your vision in the valley to get stronger and clear 2020 vision.
Accept.
Here it is, application.
Accept the path of pain.
Aggressively put fear in its place.
Don't let it paralyze you anymore.
Acknowledge the presence of God and allow God's purposes to be fulfilled.
You do those four things?
Your vision is going to get better.
We praise you, Lord.
We give you glory.
You're such a great and awesome and mighty God.
This valley or gorge that we're going through, oh, I pray, God, that you would just continue to pour out your blessing, your grace, your mercies.
They're new every morning.
Even this morning, Lord, mercy was being poured out given to people.
Thank you, Lord, for that.
Thank you for the path of pain.
We accept it.
We do.
We want to be aggressive against fear.
I will fear no evil.
We want to acknowledge your presence.
We want to allow your purposes to be fulfilled in this valley.
Our vision is getting better.
We thank you Lord for that.
Help us to continue to get stronger.
May things become more clear.
And when those are in the valley right now, maybe listening, you know, watch this online sometime in the future and they're going through some stuff that is just beyond belief.
You can't even imagine the depth of the pain.
Oh, that was David.
David had absolutely betrayed him and eventually was killed.
Such a heartbreaking thing for David.
I pray for the hearts that are breaking in this room.
May they have a clear vision of who you are.
They're going to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living.
That's what your word says.
And I pray over them.
We pray over them as a church.
Thank you, Lord, for today.
We pray that you were pleased and honored and glorified.
Thank you for speaking to us.
How about we read Psalm 23 out loud.
We'll do the whole thing.
We're trying to memorize it.
Ready out loud, the Lord is my shepherd.
I shall not want.
He makes me lie down in green pastures.
He leads me beside still waters.
He restores my soul.
He leads me in paths of righteousness for his namesake.
Even though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil for you are with me.
Your rod and your staff, they comfort me.
You prepare a table before me in the presence of my enemies.
In the presence of, I'm sorry, you're anoint my head with oil, my cup overflows.
Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life, and I shall dwell in the house of the Lord forever.
This is the word of the Lord.
Thanks for listening to the Crossway Christian Church's Middleford campus sermon podcast.
If you like to plug into the life of our community or have any questions that we might be able to answer, visit our website at crosswayscc.org to connect with us.
Until next time, we can be with you.
May the Lord bless you and keep you.